---
layout: post
title:  "Lots of ice climbing!"
date:   2021-03-21
categories: mountaineering
---

Hello again everyone,


It feels like yesterday that I was writing the first update of my series! Time is really flying by
with the busy schedule and how exciting the course is. This week’s update is a little bit long but
definitely check out the March 18 update if you want to skim! Today (21 March) is the first day of
two days off. This break is between the ice climbing and the skiing section of the course. And I
100% need it. Two days ago I felt totally burned out from back to back to back days of hard ice
climbing but luckily I was able to recover after taking 1 relatively light day. Regardless, it has
been an absolutely epic experience so far and because of the level of exertion, I can shovel food
into me without even thinking about it.


![alt-text](https://unsplash.com/photos/ZsvaiqmAhl8/download?force=true&w=640)

The boys cooking in the kitchen


I have realized that the level of baseline food consumption is on an entirely different scale. The
other day I ate a medium box of pasta + a large plate of chicken tenders and fries + 2-3 small
tangerines and a banana + some cashews + some chocolate just for dinner and I still felt I could eat
more. Days that I don’t eat enough food the night before, especially, I feel the effects of not
enough food the next day. In spite of pigging out in the name of alpinism, I have been losing
weight. If anyone is looking for a weight loss program, look no further than climbing!


![alt-text](https://unsplash.com/photos/c9Fhr5rDsBM/download?force=true&w=640)

Unreal sunrise on the mountains visible from the Yamnuska centre - Ship's Prow,
Lawrence Grassi, Miners and Ha Ling



So, we had our first full week of climbing. Some days were lighter than others but we climbed daily
and it has been taxing on the mind and the body but not the stoke. I am just as excited about
climbing as the first day I showed up here!



**March 15: Getting back into it at King Creek**



We started off the week at a classic ice climbing crag called King Creek. It is along a hike popular
during summer and winter so if you can - check it out!


What is interesting about Kings Creek is that it is located on Inuit land and is considered sacred
and therefore development of rock climbing in the area is not allowed - but ice climbing is for some
reason!

In any case, we were able to get in some really fun climbing and the entire party was in good
spirits with plenty of energy to spare. Everyone was able to crush all the routes set up and there
was a cool climb that was easy but kind of led into a cave where I hung out for a bit.



![alt-text](https://unsplash.com/photos/i5RN9IXK0tU/download?force=true&w=640)

A rare selfie of myself - in the cave!





**March 16 Hard climbing at Hafner creek**



This was a day for some try-hard climbing! Nick and James astutely figured that our group had some
energy to spare and pushed us by taking us to Hafner.

This place is probably my favorite ice crag. It has an abundance of hard vertical ice and also a ton
of mixed routes. A mixed route is when the route contains climbing some rock and then some ice (or
vice versa but typically rock before ice - you climb the rock to get to the ice).



![alt-text](https://unsplash.com/photos/LKFqtJwMizg/download?force=true&w=640)

Mixed climbing - climbing from the rock onto the ice



![alt-text](https://unsplash.com/photos/eHHp5aQYsFA/download?force=true&w=640)

The spectacular ice pillars at Hafner



I was able to complete some of these uber hard mixed routes and that has probably been among the
most satisfying moments of the trip so far.



March 17 Easy day in the Lower Junkyards



After some hefty climbing at Kings Creek and Hafner, the guides opted for a light day to let us
recover a bit. We did some pretty relaxed climbing at the Junkyards (ice crag which is super close
to Canmore). Messed around by doing some ‘no-tooling’ where we only use our feet to climb ice on
some of the easier routes and got our pairings and locations for our big multi pitch day the next
day!



March 18 Brown man climbs Whiteman Falls



Mountaineering in North America is predominantly dominated by caucasians which has often been cited
as a diversity problem which people are trying to address. Something I recently realized is that I
am the only non-caucasian person in the course and other than one other guide from Taiwan, the only
non-caucasian in this entire endeavor, guides included (so far). However, till date I have not felt
in any way discriminated against by my peers or the guides and in fact feel whole-heartedly welcomed
into the community. It has been amazing!



With that in mind, I did raise half of my eyebrow at least when I heard the name Whiteman falls.
Interestingly, the climb right next to it was first climbed by Barry Blanchard who is the co-founder
of Yamnuska Mountain Guides and he named it Redman soars as a sort of counter! This place is located
right next to King Creek!



![alt-text](https://unsplash.com/photos/K0T7cYU1wUY/download?force=true&w=640)

James doing James things climbing Whiteman's gracefully



This route is just an epic day of climbing which starts with a 2 hour hard hike in soft snow on the
unshoveled part of Highway 40. Lots of post holing and winding uphills along the road. We were
greeted by the alpenglow on the ranges surrounding us which was quite surreal.



![alt-text](https://unsplash.com/photos/HTbiJaFp4us/download?force=true&w=640)

The sun rising as we did the long approach to Whiteman's



Entering the woods changes the dynamic of the approach a little by becoming extremely steep and icy
requiring crampons. Once we navigate that, we get to an ice fall that is extremely thin. Whack your
ice tool too far and you break through to the flowing creek and end your day of ice climbing by
completely drenching yourself.


Once successful, you have an extremely steep snow/ice hike to the base of Whiteman falls for an
approach of nearly 3 hours.



![alt-text](https://unsplash.com/photos/Dv_4_CPX14g/download?force=true&w=640)

The final approach section with the top of Whitemans visible from a distance



I was climbing with James (guide) and Nick (fellow student, not guide). James led the pitch with
pure grace and set up the belay station for both Nick and me. The first pitch of climbing was quite
varied with lots of intricate climbing and seeing some interesting ice formations like a ‘glass
window’ (perfectly clear ice that let you see through the ice fall to the water still flowing
underneath) and the ‘apartment’ (small room like formation which let about two people stand inside
comfortably and had a completely flat floor). There were also some ice mushrooms and chandeliers
which were just dripping ice creating these structures.



The second pitch was much more full-on and less ‘technical’ and required more brute strength. Sadly
I fell off one time from being totally tired from climbing. Since I was on belay, I just hung out
for a bit to get some strength back to finish the climb. The entire climb goes at WI 6 (WI 7+ is the
highest possible grading for pure water ice) and the climb definitely felt like it.

We were greeted with a narrow (Whiteman's is in a canyon) but stunning view of the valley below.



![alt-text](https://unsplash.com/photos/G4bp2qNKXNA/download?force=true&w=640)

Stunning view from the top of Whiteman's



We had to reverse our ascent to descend and get back on the road for the 5 km of post holing back to
the car. The day ended with a 17 km total distance traversed.



![alt-text](https://unsplash.com/photos/vI20WNNQT5s/download?force=true&w=640)

A panoramic view from our long path back to the car



**March 19 Barely holding on at Bear Spirit**



Not much to report here. I was totally wiped from the epic day before and we got to enjoy some
skills learning at Bear Spirit which also has a fairly long hike in. Tiring but extremely beautiful.



![alt-text](https://unsplash.com/photos/Ux2n12Mphdk/download?force=true&w=640)

It started coming down on us as we climbed at Bear Spirit



![alt-text](https://unsplash.com/photos/sOqd9qj_x7o/download?force=true&w=640)

The beautiful but strenuous hike in and out of Bear Spirit



**March 20 Back at it at Hafner Creek**



We wrapped up our ice climbing section with some final ‘all-or-nothing’ climbing back at Hafner. We
attempted some other mixed routes which sadly I could not complete, however, I was happy with how
far I got on each of them.



That wraps up a hectic week of ice climbing in the Canmore area. On each of the drives we did, I was
able to spot some epic climbing locations and pin point some classic ice climbs in the rockies from
the road itself. Truly lucky to be in such a spot even if it is for just a few months!



Looking forward to the next week which will contain 2 days off but the start of the skiing section
and our first camping section as well!

Thanks all!



-- G
